# Threat-Modeling-for-LMS
Security analysis using Threat Modeling for
Learning Management System
Aditya Trivedi
Systems and Computer Engineering Department
Carleton University
Ottawa, Canada
adityatrivedi@cmail.carleton.ca



Abstract—Learning management system are one of the most
vulnerable and critical information systems present in today’s
world, and since the advent of COVID-19 pandemic the Learning
Management Systems has become the prime focus of academic
organizations around the world. This report as a part of research
study critically analyzes the Blackboard Learning Management
System by bifurcating its various sub modules and carefully
inspecting the vulnerabilities found in each module through
STRIDE Threat Modeling Analysis methodology. The main aim
of this report is to provide a broader overview of the overall security
architecture of Blackboard Learning Management System
through the angle of threat modeling of the LMS and outlining
the vulnerabilities observed in the Blackboard LMS. Also, the
authors will provide general security recommendations which
can be applied while developing a LMS after careful analyses
through threat modeling of Blackboard LMS.


I. INTRODUCTION
ICT encompasses data-handling equipment for producing,
storing, processing, distributing, and exchanging data, as well
as electronic technology and management strategies. The goal
of IT security in the workplace ICT is used to prevent unauthorised
users, also known as ”hackers”/threat agents from
interfering with, stealing from, or exploiting these systems
[1] Assets, devices, and services are all examples of assets.
For numerous institutions of higher learning, Information
and communication technologies, higher education (ICT) is
a critical strategic and functional component requirement.
However, because most people rely on ICT for their jobs, as
the core services operations of the institutions expand, so does
the security. The amount of data that is processed, saved, and
shared is for management, this is becoming a big source of
concern. Dividing the most critical security flaws into four
groups [2]
• Authentication - impersonate a user and get access to
unprotected conversations
• Availability - prevent authorized end users from accessing
e-learning services and data.
• Confidentiality - unauthorized access to privileged information
and resources
• Integrity - allows an attacker to guess URLs and perform
unlawful operations on vulnerable LMS data


II. LEARNING MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
A. Definition
Since the previous few years, there has been a lot of
investment in terms of technological innovation and scalability
in the field of digital education. The global pandemic of
COVID-19 gave a huge boost to digital learning, with practically
all schools, colleges, universities, and other academic
institutions moving to the digital realm. Learning Management
Systems (LMS) are an essential component of the digital
learning environment and fall under the Information and Communication
Systems critical infrastructure. The exploitation
of security vulnerabilities and threats to the assets in these
systems are also being reported in huge numbers because of
this massive and emergent shift. LMS features include course
announcements, file repositories, curriculum descriptions, file
exchange, discussion forums, chats, email exchange, online
quizzes, opinion polls, document annotation, and assessment
tools.

B. Role and Importance
Any educational institution can increase its production and
efficiency by implementing an LMS platform. The causes or
benefits [3] There are a lot of them, and they’re all different.
• Time and money savings
• Management effectiveness
• Ease of access to educational materials
• Data Collection on Students
• Communication that is both quick and comfortable
The learning management system (LMS) is becoming increasingly
popular among academics. The research done in
the topic of LMS security isn’t in accordance with the security
standards of confidentiality, integrity, and availability as well
as authentication.


III. NEED FOR SECURITY ENGINEERING PRACTICES
In terms of the human-motivated exploitation of security
vulnerabilities, several educational service providers have been
caught red-handed using personal information and metadata on
students for illegitimate commercial reasons in recent years.
This has raised concerns about the management of personal
data and information generated by online educational systems
like a Learning Management System (LMS). This is especially
true in the case of a Learning Management System (LMS),
which collects, stores, and analyses personal data and behavioral
information from students.


IV. PRIMARY VULNERABILITIES AND THREATS
Every key information system in the world has a margin
of error that is commonly abused by external Threat agents.
Learning Management Systems are another vital system, and
since its widespread adoption during the COVID-19 era, there
has been an exponential rise in the number of assaults against
various LMS implemented by various academic institutions
across the world. This section discusses a few of the numerous
common vulnerabilities that have been accumulated from various
articles, papers published, and discussions held throughout
the course.

Sharing of User accounts In e-learning programmes,
assessing learner progress is a crucial step. Teachers must
conduct specific evaluations and assessments in order to grade
students’ progress with educational resources. Electronic tests
have the potential to be a very effective tool for assessing
learner knowledge. Correct identification of the student who
performs the e-learning tasks is a crucial part of the electronic
examination. Simply put, the credentials assigned to a certain
student must be used [6].
• Only by this student;
• Solely by this student;
• Solely by this student without the assistance of other
students


”Sharing User Accounts” is how we address a probable
breach of the regulations above. There are three possible techniques
for ensuring fairness in online examinations: The first
way is self-evident: the online exam is conducted in a specially
designated area with enough computers. In this instance, the
examination is overseen by a teacher or an assistant who
oversees verifying user IDs and their behaviour during the test.
A different approach is to use video conferencing software. All
students must first log into the video session in this situation.
Using the video conferencing tool, the teacher can examine the
students’ IDs and behaviour during the examination. Finally,
the LMS may include a special software component that can:


• Take random photos of users in front of computers;
• Recognize faces to verify that students with specific
credentials are truly seated in front of computers.
• Recognize the scenario in front of the computer to
demonstrate that the student is working alone and not
with the assistance of another person seated nearby
Injection We are aware that data injection is a regular threat
observed in many systems around the world, due to ease of
tools and readily available injection codes; the threat agents
have gain confident in injecting malware into any systems
by gaining unauthorized access. Also, there are many plugins
available online which can help In making a simple website
into a full functional LMS.


There are mainly 3 Wordpress plugins namely LearnPress,
LearnDash, and LifterLMS which can convert any Word-
Press website in a full featured LMS[4]. These plugins have
been found to inject unauthorised authentication on the LMS
websites in the academic organizations and students have
been able to gain access of the confidential content. As
per CVE Details website, vulnerability record CVE 2019-
5112 states that The authenticated component of Forma LMS
2.2.1 contains an exploitable SQL injection vulnerability[5].
SQL injections were validated in the /appLms/ajax.server.php
URL and parameter filter status, which may be exploited by
authorised attackers. To trigger this vulnerability, an attacker
can make a web request with parameters containing SQL injection
attacks, potentially allowing exfiltration of the database,
user passwords, and, in some cases, access to the underlying
operating system.


The SQL injection in FormaLMS has lead to compromising
critical user data like passwords, LMS database, and operating
system as well. Thus, it is evident that Injection in code is
one of the popular and critical vulnerability which is being
encountered by today’s LMS around the world and it has the
capability of corrupting the operations of the LMS by gaining
unauthorized access of the LMS.


Cross-Site Scripting One of the most popular applicationlayer
online threats is phishing. XSS is most typically used to
target client server-side scripts placed in a website. XSS is a
danger that is caused by internet security flaws in client-side
scripting languages, with HTML and JavaScript being the most
common targets for this exploit. The goal of XSS is to change
client-side scripts in a web application so that they run in the
malicious user’s preferred manner. This type of manipulation
can include embedding a script on a page that will run every
time the page is loaded or when an associated event occurs.
The following malicious outcomes can be achieved with an
XSS attack [6]:
• Denial of service attacks;
• obtaining sensitive information;
• identity theft;
• modifying browser functionality;
• online application defacement


Session Hijacking The exploitation of a valid computer
session, also known as a session key, to gain unwanted access
to information or services in a computer system is known as
session hijacking. This essentially entails stealing the session
cookie’s magic login hash. This is accomplished by providing
the browser with a unique and difficult-to-guess identifying
value (session id) that the browser transmits with each new
request (either in a cookie or in the URL). The session will
continue to exist as long as the browser sends the id with each
new request. When the session id is insufficiently encrypted,
too short, or assigned sequentially, the attack is possible [4].
Cross Site Request Forgery(CSRF) It is a type of attack
in which the target is tricked into loading a website with a
malicious request. It is malicious in that it takes on the victim’s
identity and privileges in order to carry out an unwanted
action on the victim’s behalf, such as changing the victim’s
e-mail address, home address, or password, or making a
purchase. 

CSRF attacks are usually directed against functions
that modify the state of the server, but they can also be used to
get access to sensitive information. Most browsers will include
any credentials linked with the site, such as the user’s session
cookie, basic authentication credentials, IP address, Windows
domain credentials, and so on, with such requests. As a result,
the attacker can force the victim to execute activities they did
not plan to, such as logging out, purchasing an item, changing
account information, retrieving account information, or any
other feature provided by the vulnerable website [6].


A. Insights on recent attacks
Since last few years, digital education has been an area
where there has been a lot of investment in terms of technological
evolution and scalability. The global pandemic of COVID-
19 provided an exemplary boost to the space of digital learning
and almost all the schools, colleges, universities, and various
academic institution were shifted to digital space. Due to
this enormous and emergent shift; the exploitation of security
vulnerabilities and threats to the assets in this systems are
also being noted in large numbers. Course announcements, file
repositories, curriculum descriptions, file exchange, discussion
forums, chats, email exchange, online quizzes, opinion polls,
document annotation, and evaluation facilities are all common
LMS features [7].


Docebo has four types of vulnerabilities for data released
between 2006 and 2012: File Inclusion (46%), SQL Injection
(27), Gain Information (18%)), and XSS (9%). From 2004 to
2021, Blackboard will provide five different types of courses.
XSS (52%) is one of the most common vulnerabilities. Privilege
(19%), bypassing something (14 %), and gaining CSRF
(10%) and information (10%). Moodle is exposed to 11 threats
between 2004 and 2021. XSS and other sorts of attacks
(30%), Gain Bypass Something (30%), Information (30%),
CSRF (8%), Execute Code (6%), and SQL Injection (4%).
Gain Privilege (5%), Denial of Service (3%), and Denial of
Service (2%). HTTP Response Splitting, Directory Traversal,
and Inclusion of Files [8].


V. SECURITY MEASURES FOR THE LEARNING
MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
Due to COVID-19 pandemic, a huge number of academic
organizations have to compulsory shift their focus towards
online learning and as per Skybox Security there has been
an increase of 72% in the attacks done on the learning
management systems in the second quarter of 2020 [9]. This
shows that the attacks launched on the LMS are targeting the
“primary assets” of the system by entering through different
“entry points” in the System.

The most difficult aspect of this study was incorporating
our analyses into a real-world system and procuring remedies
based on our results. We produced a list of the most
popular learning management systems based on the number
of users, and discovered that Moodle and Blackboard are the
most susceptible ones. Here as we have taken the observing
system as Blackboard Learning Management System because
of the extensive documentation provided in terms of security
engineering and the ease with which we could gain access
using a friend’s college account, hence the following sections
will keep the mentioned LMS in focus and explain the security
requirements, coverage of CIA triad, assets identification, and
threat modeling strategy with respect to Blackboard Learning
Management system.


A. CIA Coverage for Blackboard LMS
Confidentiality safeguards are in place to keep sensitive
information safe from prying eyes. Throughout the lifespan
of data, integrity is defined as the continuous preservation
of consistency, precision, and dependability. And availability
guarantees that authorized parties have constant and easy
access to information.
Threat agents are relying on failed backups and/or inducing
backups to fail to attack data across fragmented IT infrastructures,
increasing the efficacy of assaults and putting enterprises
at risk. Traditional data protection methods are unable to keep
up with the evolving nature of assaults. As we’ve seen, there’s
a trend toward social engineering-based behavioral assaults
including phishing, Account Takeover (ATO), Business Email
Compromise (BEC), and even ransomware behavioral modifications.
Modern ransomware does not instantly explode and
encrypt. The gestation period is intended to allow the virus
enough time to propagate from machine to machine as broadly
as possible, usually by exploiting the rights of the systems it
has infected [10].
Confidentiality
• Role-based Access Control (RBAC) - allows you to limit
a user’s access to an appliance, an asset, or a task. A
role is assigned to each user account that determines the
sorts of tasks the user may conduct on the device. The
”Manage Role” feature may also be further modified by
setting an access level and other settings.
• Volume and File Encryption - allow you to set or disable
encryption on a per-client basis, change passwords as
appropriate, and guarantee that data is encrypted from
start to finish for local or off-site backup copies.
• SSAE 16 Certified Tier 3 Cloud Data Centers – ensures
data on cloud to remain private.


Integrity
• Encryption - To safeguard and preserve your sensitive
data, backup and recovery solutions should employ AES
256-bit encryption.
• Hashing - The SHA-512 cryptographic hash algorithm
can be used to monitor duplicate blocks during deduplication
and provides a variety of mechanisms for keeping
hash references when data is deduplicated.
• Recovery testing – A recover assurance program is
needed which with no IT work or effort, it automatically
executes the highest degree of application recovery
testing. It fully recovers apps, does analytics, calculates
recovery time and point, and pinpoints because any
recoveries failed.
• Reporting - allows you to perform a disaster recovery test
automatically and view results and statistics that show
how an outage will affect business continuity and how
much data your company would lose.
• Hardened Linux backup appliances - Unlike weaker
Windows-based backups, this one is impervious to ransomware.
• Immutable Cloud Storage for Backup Copy - stores a
copy of your backups in the cloud or on detached media
(such as disc) that is distinct and separated from your
production system and network to give an immutable
backup copy using AWS appliances.


Availability
• Self-Healing backup – needed in order to automatically
cure the most frequent backup errors without lifting a
finger and how to fix them.
• Instant Recovery - In only a few minutes, you can restore
a failed or corrupted virtual computer or real Windows
server and access its whole data set. This implies that
in the event of a server failure, your production data
will be available and your staff will be able to resume
work immediately. Faster recovery translates to reduced
downtime and more production for your company.
• Replicas - The VM replica functionality allows you
to quickly restore a failing VMware virtual machine.
It produces a virtual machine duplicate of the original
VM and updates it by running backups of the original
VM. Windows file-level replica (previously known as
Windows rapid recovery) allows you to restore a failed
physical Windows asset quickly. It builds a virtual machine
duplicate of the Windows computer and updates it
by running backups of the original asset.


B. Security Needs and Regulations
Many organizations, such as the Open Web Application
Security Project (OWASP), have established defined criteria,
including particular remedies for the OWASP Top Ten
vulnerabilities, which Blackboard must follow in order to
make it safer and more resilient. The incorporation of these
security practices in all the phases of Software Development
Life Cycle (SDLC) will make it a vigilant and a carefully
tested product. Since OWASP regulations are accepted as a
standard throughout the industry and the same applies to the
Blackboard as well. Hence, we have considered the OWASP
security regulations for the project [11].
Application Code - The SaaS application code should be
written in tandem with the adoption of new technologies to
take use of their built-in security features and best practices
by following a Security Assurance Program.
Ensuring Security - Asset protection is a must if a system
is to be properly protected. The National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST), European Network and Information
Security Agency (ENISA), SANS Institute Open Web
Application Security Project (OWASP), and Cloud Security
Alliance (CSA) recommend a top-down approach of Threat
Modelling Analysis and a bottom-up approach of code-level
threat detection through static analysis, dynamic analysis, and
manual penetration testing.


Network Security
• Secure Communication - Transport Layer Security (TLS)
technology is used to protect all communication over
the Internet in the Learn SaaS product. TLS protects
communications from being read or altered by a third
party. TLS is required by default for the SaaS offering.
The Amazon Elastic Load Balancer is where TLS comes
to an end (ELB). TLS certificates must be encrypted using
a 2048-bit key.
• Minimum attack surface area - Customer instances of the
Learn SaaS product terminate TLS at the Amazon Elastic
Load Balancer (ELB). As a result, the ELBs are the only
assets with inbound access. 80 (http) and 443 (https) are
the ports that are available (https). When you access port
80, you’ll be redirected to port 443, which means secure
connection via TLS.
Access Management
• Customer administrative access - Customers can only
use the web interface via TLS to access their Learn
SaaS offering instances. Customers cannot access their
instances through command-line or back-end access for
security reasons.
• Application access - Only authorized Blackboard workers
can use the web interface over TLS to access the Learn
SaaS offering instances.
• Back-end access - SSH keys would grant command-line
and back-end access to a select group of employees. SSH
keys are required for access, which is a more secure
means of access than username/passwords. A tiny group
is in charge of keys, which may be revoked at any time.
• Console access - Multi-factor authentication (MFA) is required
to access the Amazon Web Services web interface
from Blackboard.


Disaster Recovery
• Database resiliency and backups - The database for the
Learn SaaS service is PostgreSQL. Nightly backups are
also taken by this service, providing availability and
durability by allowing the service to switch to a different
availability zone in the case of a database failure.
VI. SECURITY CHALLENGES IN BLACKBOARD LMS
Security concerns are referred to as ’emergent’ or ’emerging’
when a larger group of security specialists begins to
discuss and debate a particular issue as a precursor to
formulating, resourcing, and then implementing appropriate
policy responses. Implementing security architecture of any
system ultimately boils to address the principle of Security
Engineering i.e Confidentiality, Integrity, and Availability. If
these principle are satisfied then it is evident that less security
challenges will be faced in the later stage of implementation.
Security Challenges are mostly identified during the design
phase of the SDLC, while designing the flow of the system It
is important to cater the security principles along with the flow
as it helps in deciding whether any kind of challenges will be
faced or not while engineering the security of the system. In
this report we will give a general overview of the challenges
faced by a LMS and not confine the discussion to Blackboard
LMS as the overall functional architecture of all the LMS is
similar to each other. For the convenience of understanding,
we have bifurcated the challenges as shown in above Table
which are faced by a typical LMS in terms of the CIA triad
so it becomes easy to identify the challenges and link them
with either Confidentiality, Integrity or Availability [12].


VII. METHODOLOGY
A. Threat Modeling and its Purpose
Threat modeling is the process of identifying, communicating,
and comprehending risks and mitigation in the context of
safeguarding anything valuable. A threat model is a logical
representation of all the data that influences an application’s
security. In essence, it’s a security-focused look at the program
and its surroundings. Software, applications, systems, networks,
distributed systems, Internet of Things (IoT) devices,
and business processes can all be subjected to threat modeling.
A threat model usually comprises the following elements [13]:
• The subject to be modeled is described in detail.
• As the threat landscape changes, assumptions that may
be tested or disputed in the future
• Threats to the system that can be addressed and actions
that can be done to mitigate each threat
• A method of validating the model and threats, as well as
confirming the effectiveness of measures implemented.
The act of obtaining, organizing, and evaluating all of
this data is known as threat modeling. It provides educated
decision-making regarding application security threats when
applied to software. Typical threat modeling initiatives generate
a prioritized list of security enhancements to an application’s
idea, requirements, design, or implementation in
addition to a model.

It aids in the creation of a prioritized list of security
enhancements. Threat modeling can take place throughout the
planning, design, and/or implementation phases of a feature.
Threat modeling not only allows the team to have a better
understanding of the product, but it also lets them to gain a
better understanding of the application’s many components.
It’s useful to understand why and how the components are related
to the product. This understanding aids in comprehending
the product’s positive and negative effects. Threat modeling
can aid in the development of safe and reliable goods. The
threat model provides reasonable security judgments based
on all the information available from the process. It gives
a clear perspective across any product that justifies security
efforts if done correctly. Some firms may see instant good
effects from the process, while others will take longer. The
outcomes are determined by how security is incorporated
into the company as well as the product teams’ objectives.
The primary goal for analyzing the threats by employing
threat modeling methodology was due to the above-mentioned
advantages, and threat modeling provides robustness along
with efficiency in modeling and analyzing threats for the
critical systems developed in any domain. Whereas methods
like Risk-metric Configuration analysis are unable to model
the threats for complex systems like LMS and also, they yield
inefficient threat analysis when the requirements of the system
changes [14].

Some of the popular tools that are being used are [15]: 1.
Cairis 2. IriusRisk 3. Kenna.VM 4. Microsoft Threat Modeling
Tool 5. OWASP Threat Dragon 6. SDElements by Security
Compass 7. SecuriCAD by Foreseeti 8. Threagile 9. Threat-
Modeler 10. Tutamantic

B. Microsoft STRIDE tool
Out of plethora of threat modeling tools available in the
market, we went with Microsoft Threat Modeling tool as
it is one of the most well-known and well-tested threat
modelling tools available. It’s an open-source program [15]
that adheres to the STRIDE (spoofing, tampering, repudiation,
information disclosure, denial of service, and elevation
of privilege) approach. One of the important factors while
choosing this tool is the dependency onWindows OS. This tool
allowed us to create a threat model using data flow diagrams
(DFDs) available in the app. It is mostly concerned with
Azure and Windows services. We also established a threat list
and researched mitigation strategies for each danger and also
produced and exported reports for the models. Because this
is open-source software, there is a lot of documentation and
assistance forums, and it became the default option for this
project. For the sake of conceptual understanding, we have
set a concrete base of Blackboard – a learning management
system that is high on the radar for being highly vulnerable
to threats, penetrations and other attacks.

C. DFD Analysis
Based on the research published by the Messe et al [17]we
have bifurcated the assets in two categories namely Domain
Asset (DA) and Vulnerable Asset (VA) .
Domain Asset: Anything that is valuable and contributes to
the system’s purpose and goal, as well as the assurance of its
properties. DA is a byproduct of a specific system architecture.
Vulnerable Asset: It has flaws that can be exploited by
attackers. As a result, it is the attacker’s primary target. It
can have an impact on important domain assets if it is hacked
(DA). As a result, they require protection to lessen dangers and
avoid attacks. VA is a system artefact that appears in attack
patterns or vulnerability bases that are abstract.
The identification of the External Entities, Data stores and
Processes was the result of the analysis procured by referring
the available information regarding architecture of Blackboard
LMS available on its website. Along with this, Videos and
articles on YouTube and literature websites respectively. After
studying the features asset identification was carried out by
mapping the probable occurrences of threats and risks for
each module sub-component as per Module 2 of the course
and further the DFD’s were prepared for each system module
identified. Although, Blackboard LMS consists of many other
modules but due to space limitation, threat modeling only for
crucial modules is conducted.


Fig. 1. General Architecture
The above-mentioned data flow diagram depicts Blackboard
LMS’s overall architecture. Because the blackboard LMS
contains various user roles, such as instructors, students, and
administrators, each user position has its own set of credentials
for logging in. Once the credentials are entered, the browser
client sends them to the Apache Tomcat web server, where the
OpenAthens authorization provider approves the user role and
sets the rights and permissions using its identity and access
management function.Once the role has been determined, the
services for instance, courses, grades, exams, etc. are being
accessed and for the future reference and cookie sessions, the
credentials are stored in Oracle’s SQL database. Let us now
understand the threat properties for the same:
Spoofing A Threat agent may fake the user, allowing
unauthorized access to the Browser Client. Similarly, a threat
agent may impersonate the Apache Tomcat Access Request
Service, allowing unauthorized access to the Browser Client,
which could be stopped by identifying the originating process.
To identify the foreign entity, we can use a normal authentication
approach. A threat agent might fake the OpenAthens
Authorization Provider, giving them illegal access to the
Student or Teacher Role. A threat agent might spoof Oracle
SQL Database, causing data to be written to the attacker’s
destination instead of Oracle SQL Database. To identify the
target data repository, we can use a conventional authentication
technique as a mitigation or control measure.
Tampering Apache Tomcat Access Request Service can
tamper with Browser Client if it is granted access to memory,
such as shared memory or pointers, or if it is given the ability
to manipulate what Browser Client executes (for example, by
handing back a function reference). We can consider whether
the function could operate with less memory use, such as
supplying data rather than pointers and then copying in and
validating the data given. Because it does not sanitize insecure
input, the web server ’Apache Tomcat Access Request
Service’ might be vulnerable to a cross-site scripting attack.
SQL injection is a type of attack in which malicious code
is embedded in strings and then supplied to a SQL Server
instance for parsing and execution. Because SQL Server will
execute all syntactically valid queries it receives, any operation
that creates SQL statements should be checked for injection
vulnerabilities. A knowledgeable and determined attacker can
modify even parameterised data. A threat agent might interfere
with data traveling over Data Request. This might cause the
Oracle SQL Database to be corrupted.


Repudiation The Browser Client, OpenAthens authorization
provider, and Oracle SQL database may assert that data
sent from a source beyond the trust boundary was not received.
To record the source, time, and summary of the received data,
we can use logging or auditing.
Information Disclosure A threat agent might view information
that was not meant to be shared due to a flaw in Oracle
SQL Database’s data security. In this case, examining and
adjusting authorization settings can assist.
Denial of Service When a browser or Apache Tomcat web
server crashes, or when it halts, pauses, or runs slowly, an
availability measure is violated. Install and configure firewalls
and intrusion prevention systems to monitor and block knownmalicious
and illegitimate traffic to avoid this.


Elevation of Privilege Man in the Middle (MitM) attacks
are susceptible to common SSO solutions like OAUTH2 and
OAUTH Wrap. We can avoid this by keeping crucial data on
the server and merely sending session IDs to the client. It is
extremely useful to tamper-proof the data by utilizing a digital
signature and encrypting the data transmitted to the customer.
1) Login Module: In the login module as shown in Figure
2—Login Page, Login Algorithm and OpenAthens Authorization
provider are identified as DA and User role, Web server,
and Database are identified as VA.


Fig. 2. Login Module
Here the login page is subjected to “Privilege access” attack
under “Elevation of Privilege” category as a threat agent
can impersonate the context of User Role to gain additional
privilege. Due to this a threat agent logging in as a student can
have the access privilege of the teacher which can compromise
the login architecture and critical data as well. A multi-factor
authentication feature can be implemented to prevent incorrect
user role login.


The Web Server can be subjected to the “Cross Site Scripting”
attack under Tampering category as Blackboard LMS’s
web server does not sanitises the input coming from the web
application hosting the login page. In order to tackle the threat,
escaping content method or employing the Apache Commons
Lang library since Blackboard LMS uses Apache Tomcat
server can be beneficial in order to sanitize the input.
SQL Database may be spoofed by a threat agent, and
this may lead to data being written to the threat agent’s
target instead of SQL Database. A standard authentication
mechanism for the input data and output data or encryption to
identify the destination data store can be applied as a remedy
2) Course Module: The Login Page, Course Repository
Management System, Course contents, Course Database are
identified as DA for the course module. Whereas Cloud
Storage is identified as the VA.


Fig. 3. Course Module
The course module of the Blackboard LMS is also a multirole
module where in the teacher and student can access the
module from two different views as the students can access
the uploaded contents and teachers can upload the necessary
content. As shown in the figure, when the student logs in, as
per their configured privilege the course repository management
system will show the enrolled courses listed based on
Semesters i.e Fall’21, Winter’22 etc. Once the semester is selected
the students can visit the various course module features
like Course Content, Course Discussion Board, Groups, Tools
etc depending on the features made available by the academic
organization.

The course database is the centralised system module in
the Blackboard LMS as it holds the data related to overall
Courses and is also responsible for performing any changes
requested related to the course module. For example, whenever
new discussion threads are opened in the Course module the
necessary changes will be made in the database. The data
stored in the database is updated in real time and same is in
sync with the Cloud Storage as well. Similarly, the main role
of the teacher is to upload and modify the content posted on
the module and the same is reflected in the Course Database as
well. The updated data flows through the centralised database
and is reflected at student’s end as well.
Here the Course Database suffers from “Repudiation” threat
as Course Database claims that it did not write data received
from an entity on the other side of the trust boundary. The
possible remedy for this threat can be auditing and recording
the source, time, and summary of data received at the database.
The course repository has a threat related to “Information
disclosure” as Improper data protection of Course Repository
for Students can allow an attacker to read information not
intended for disclosure. The control measure for this threat can
be employed by providing authorization for the data which
is coming into the course repository and going out of the
repository.


3) Exam Module: The Login Page, Exam Database, Result
Database are identified as DA for the exam module. Whereas
Web Server, Create Exam, Take Exam, View Results, and Print
Reports are identified as the VA.


Fig. 4. Exam Module
The Blackboard LMS exam module is a module in which
instructors and students may access the module from two
separate perspectives: students can access and write uploaded
examinations, and teachers can submit exams, essential information,
and results. Finally, students will receive their report,
as well as feedback from their faculty members. As can be
seen, the requests are all in synergy, with the instructor taking
the lead in preparing the test, followed by the student writing
it, and all of the data being stored in the corresponding exam
and results databases. A threat agent might spoof Results
Database, causing data to be written to the threat agent’s
destination instead of Results Database. To identify the target
data storage, consider utilizing a standard authentication
technique. To identify the target data repository, we can use a
conventional authentication technique. Exam Database’s data
security flaws might allow an threat agent to view information
that was not meant to be shared. Reviewing your authorization
settings may be beneficial in this situation.


4) Grade Module: The Login Page, Result Management
Database, Student Management Database and Course Information
Management Database are identified as DA for the exam
module. Whereas Web Server, Process Grades, and Provide
Exam and Quiz feature are identified as the VA. 

When a
Fig. 5. Grade Module
student enters credentials in this module, they are saved in the
student information management database together with the
student’s information. These information are then accessible
to teachers, who may choose the number of pupils who will
take the exam. When a student asks information on exams and
courses, the SQL query retrieves the data from the course information
management database that has been supplied by the
professors. After the answers are uploaded, the process grading
kicks in, and the results are sent to the result management
database, which is then passed on to the student information
management database for future monitoring and reference for
both students and instructors. Data flowing between Process
Grades might be tampered with by a threat agent. This might
result in a denial of service attack, an elevation of privilege
attack, or a data leak from Provide Exam and Quiz. Failure
to verify that input is as expected causes a large variety of
exploitable vulnerabilities. We may investigate all paths and
how they handle data by checking that all input is vetted for
correctness using an approved list input validation approach.
An attacker might spoof all three databases in this module,
causing Faculty to get false data. We can use a traditional
authentication mechanism to identify the source data storage.
5) Admin Module: For the asset identification, the Centralised
Database of LMS data, Cache Memory of the Blackboard
LMS, Database with SQL queries, Run time logs
repository, Database of logs and backup snapshot, and Live
Memory tool are considered as DA because they are local and
closely related to the Blackboard LMS.


Fig. 6. Admin Module
The admin module in the Blackboard LMS is a dedicated
module for the administrator in order to analyze, manage, and
configure the modules in the front end and data generated from
various sub-modules of the whole LMS. As a Security point
of view, it can be considered as one of the most important submodule
of the Blackboard LMS as it hosts extremely critical
information related to everything. Thus, it can be a soft target
for the external threat agents and addressing the vulnerabilities
generated from this module should be addressed in an efficient
manner in order to prevent any compromise on the critical
information.


The admin as per the Blackboard LMS architecture has
the access of all the analytics data i.e total cache memory
generated from the operations, real time view of database etc.
There can be a potential vulnerability of “Data Repudiation”
where the Run time logs repository can deny that it received
any data from the centralised database. Auditing the logs of
the centralised database which captures the input and output
data from the database can be accepted as a control measure
for this vulnerability.


Also, as per the MS STRIDE tool SQL injection as a part of
“Tampering” attack can occur when a threat agent spoofs the
identity of the administrator and inserts a faulty SQL query
into the database which can prove as a hazard for the whole
LMS of the academic organization.


VIII. OPEN RESEARCH PROBLEMS
Following are some open questions and research problems
in a learning management system pertaining to security engineering
which could lead to a devastating tragedy in terms of
organization, personal or a financial failure [17]:
Delegation of responsibilities Whether it’s for internal
workers, external partners, consumers, or students, an LMS
allows you to build, manage, and deliver effective, engaging
online training and certification programs. Depending on your
point of view, an LMS may be both powerful and beneficial.
To the student, it’s all about the training and being able
to access all of their information and training materials in
one place, as well as being able to track their progress and
have documentation of their accomplishments documented.
Because of the capacity to track learners’ training and utilize
this data, the benefits to the organization offering the training
might be even greater. An organization that gives training to
external learners may decide to sell that training, allowing
them to gain cash and perhaps profit from their efforts. At
the end of the day, an LMS is only a tool, and mastering it
poses a number of problems. There are basic administrative
responsibilities, such as registering users and assigning access
levels, and then there are teacher responsibilities, such as
producing and organizing courses. One of the first stages in
administering an LMS is delegating fundamental tasks and
duties to important departments such as HR, IT, Operations,
and so on. There should be talks about who gets to do what,
with clear descriptions of what these responsibilities are and
clear limitations for what each function encompasses. There
should be no doubt about who is in charge of each aspect
of the LMS’s operation. With an organizational framework
in place, everyone will be held accountable for doing their
responsibilities appropriately.


On-boarding of new users Getting people to use a learning
management system is a difficult task. From executives and
managers who may not be the most tech-savvy to learners
who have little interest in participating with an apparently
sophisticated learning approach, user on-boarding is a multifaceted
problem. As a result, it’s critical to consider each endunique
user’s requirements. An internal marketing campaign
that highlights the advantages of adopting an LMS is a
wonderful method to create awareness and educate the rest of
the company. Another successful technique to entice learners
is to offer rewards for finishing courses. This may assist market
eLearning to external partners and students. There’s also the
issue of having a method in place to add people to the LMS.
Knowing how to use the capabilities of the LMS can make
the process go more smoothly.


Security Policy Planning Learning Management System
are dynamic and complex systems, hence designing the security
for it is also a challening task. Before implementation
of Security with the help of Security Engineering techniques
it is importamt to frame a policy which is standardised and
applicable in general to all the LMS developed around the
world. But as of now scholars and responsible institutions are
making efforts to produce a set of policy rules apart from
OWASP regulations which covers the aspects of security and
provide a framework while providing rules and regulations for
all the general modules of a LMS.


Balance between Security and Usability It goes without
saying that the purpose of online learning security is not to hinder
its usability. However, online learning providers are now
attempting to strike a challenging balance between providing
sufficient security to secure online learning resources while
not obstructing their appropriate use. Due to the diversity of
computers and gadgets, as well as the enormous number of
various users, maintaining such a balance is difficult. Despite
the fact that security is not a top priority for many online
learning providers at the moment, major efforts are needed to
improve online learning security.


Measuring and Reporting Progress Using the data provided
by an LMS is the only way to know for sure if it is
having an impact. Modern LMSs include built-in data tracking
that keeps track of nearly every action a user performs while
interacting with the software. Administrators, managers, and
instructors should have access to a wealth of information
ranging from course completion to exam results. The difficulty
is in analyzing and interpreting the data in order to provide
reports that accurately reflect the LMS’s impact. By presenting
data via graphs and charts, a feature-rich LMS may make this
easier. An organization may make educated decisions based
on trustworthy information to focus on their strengths and
improve on their deficiencies.


Contraints on Privacy If at all possible, absolute security
can only be achieved by ultimate control. As a result, all
activity would have to be tracked and managed in real-time
in order to prevent or at the very least detect and stop
fraudulent use.Despite the stated need for thorough security
considerations, we must keep in mind the secondary benefit of
security measures [Wes08] and focus on the primary purpose
of e-learning: to support the learning process. As a result,
supervision may be regarded negatively, potentially leading
to rejection. Absolute control clashes with privacy, which is
highly valued for addressing desires for privacy and autonomy
– particularly among adult learners. As a result, security
cannot be achieved by employing all feasible logging systems;
otherwise, learners may be turned off. Communication of
planned supervision and mentoring goals is a vital step to
take. Learners must be informed about the organisational
framework, including how their learning progress will be
monitored and where private communication is permitted.
Data Privacy Compliance Since 25 May 2018, businesses
that process data have been required to comply with the
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) — a law that
protects an individual’s personal data. Such data may be
collected with the use of an LMS. Organizations that use
an LMS must then be taking strict measures to achieve and
maintain GDPR compliance. To safeguard the privacy of each
user, security processes must be set and the organization must
be educated on these processes. Having a data protection
officer within the IT department or getting a consultant from
a cybersecurity agency is the best way to disseminate such
information. A course delivered through the LMS that covers
GDPR compliance can also be effective supplemental teaching
material.


IX. CONCLUSION
Learning Management Systems (LMSs) have dominated
since the early 2000s, and their popularity has continued to
grow as more individuals have access to the Internet. As
a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, an increasing number
of organizations have stepped up to provide remote learning
and administrative help to both students and instructors. This
caused a lot of controversy and traffic, which resulted in a rise
in threats and assaults against these systems. Since modeling
these threats is an integral part of development process of
any software application, we used the robustness of Threat
modeling methodology which can detect the threats for an
already deployed application as well. To our ultimate surprise,
we found that a strong and trusted LMS like Blackboard can
also have threats which are proved grave for the features
and important data of its users. By intuitively analyzing these
threats and providing mitigation procedures, we can conclude
that the security architects and analysts for these kind of
applications shall always try to find a balance between the
usability and security of a LMS, because no system can ever
be made fully secured and at the same time prime users of
LMS which are students and teachers mostly incline towards
having a efficient set of features along with an intangible
surety that their data is safe and secured. We also provide
some recommendations as below for improving the security
architecture of a LMS pertaining to security engineering
fundamentals.


• Evaluating a system’s outside security is insufficient since
hackers and attackers may target particular modules,
making the system as a whole more vulnerable.
• Single Sign On feature must be used for authentication
purpose as it not only does it make working on numerous
websites and platforms easier, but it also increases
security.

• There were many threats specifically related to database,
hence it is important to secured the database by adding
extra layer of security with encryption, audit logs, and
sanitizing the input and output.

• It is important to model the threats iteratively for LMS
as the implementation requirements are bound to change
constantly so its necessary to address the changes through
the angle of probable threats and vulnerabilities at each
stage.

During our journey of analyzing and modeling a system in
order to build a reliable educational platform, we came across
several methods, including Threat Modeling Analysis, Risk
Analysis, Penetration Testing, Attack Surface Analysis, and
Vulnerability Assessment, with the first one standing out in
terms of efficiency and in-depth analysis of the system and
its various modules. We also came to the conclusion that .
Our research and analysis are applicable to both small and
large-scale undertakings. Finally, there are certain unsolved
security engineering issues that demand more personal and
organizational awareness, as well as technical training for end
users, which might benefit everyone who uses this platform.


REFERENCES
[1] “What is the role of ICT in security sector?,” Safety is our
everything, Sep. 14, 2021.https://gsi-alarme-securite.com/protectionofinformation/
what-is-the-role-of-ict-in-security-sector.html (accessed Apr
07, 2022).
[2] Z., Stapic’, T. Orehovaˇcki, M. anic’, “Determination of Optimal
Security Settings for LMS Moodle”, in: Proceedings of 31st MIPRO
International Convention on Information Systems Security, 5, pp. 84.-
89., Opatija, 2008.
[3] “LMS in School Role, Importance, Advantages.”
https://uteach.io/articles/lms-in-school-role-importance-advantages
(accessed Apr 07, 2022).
[4] Check Point Research. 2022. E-Learning Platforms Getting Schooled
- Multiple Vulnerabilities in WordPress’ Most Popular Learning
Management System Plugins - Check Point Research. [online] Available
at: ¡https://research.checkpoint.com/2020/e-learning-platforms-gettingschooled-
multiple-vulnerabilities-in-wordpress-most-popular-learningmanagement-
system-plugins/¿ [Accessed Apr 07, 2022].
[5] CVE-2019-5112 : Exploitable SQL injection vulnerability exists
in the authenticated portion of Forma LMS 2.2.1. The
/appLms/ajax.server.”, Cvedetails.com, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://www.cvedetails.com/cve/CVE-2019-5112. [Accessed: Apr 08,
2022]
[6] C. (Defta) Costinela - Luminit¸a and C. (Iacob) Nicoleta - Magdalena /
Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 46 ( 2012 ) 2297 – 2301.
[7] D. Amo, M. Alier, F. J. Garc´ıa-Pe˜nalvo, D. Fonseca, and M. J.
Casany, “GDPR Security and Confidentiality compliance in LMS’ a
problem analysis and engineering solution proposal,” in Proceedings
of the Seventh International Conference on Technological Ecosystems
for Enhancing Multiculturality, New York, NY, USA, Oct. 2019, pp.
253–259. doi: 10.1145/3362789.3362823
[8] E. DJEKI, J. DEGILA, C. BONDIOMBOUY, and M. H. ALHASSAN,
“Security Issues in Digital Learning Spaces,” in 2021 IEEE International
Conference on Computing (ICOCO), Nov. 2021, pp. 71–77. doi:
10.1109/ICOCO53166.2021.9673575.
[9] “Resource library,” Skybox Security.
https://www.skyboxsecurity.com/resource-library/ (accessed Apr.
10, 2022)
[10] Unitrends, “The CIA Triad and Its Importance in Data Security,”
Unitrends, May 06, 2021. https://www.unitrends.com/blog/cia-triadconfidentiality-
integrity-availability (accessed Apr. 10, 2022).
[11] “Security — Blackboard Help.” https://rb.gy/8ku727 (accessed Apr. 10,
2022).
[12] A. Scerbakov, F. Kappe, and N. Scerbakov, “SECURITY VULNERABILITIES
IN MODERN LMS,” in Proceedings of the International
Conference on e-Learning 2019, Jul. 2019, pp. 282–286. doi:
10.33965/el2019201909C038.
[13] “Threat Modeling — OWASP Foundation.” https://owasp.org/wwwcommunity/
ThreatModeling (accessed Apr. 10, 2022).
[14] nVisium, “Benefits of Threat Modeling.” https://blog.nvisium.com/p52
(accessed Apr. 10, 2022).
[15] “Top 10 Threat Modeling Tools in 2021,” Toolbox.
https://www.toolbox.com/it-security/vulnerabilitymanagement/
articles/top-threat-modeling-tools/ (accessed Apr. 10,
2022).
[16] Nan Messe, Vanea Chiprianov, Nicolas Belloir, Jamal El-Hachem, R´egis
Fleurquin, et al.. AssetOriented Threat Modeling. TrustCom 2020 -
19th IEEE International Conference on Trust, Security and Privacy in
Computing and Communications, Dec 2020, Guangzhou, China. pp.1-
11. ffhal02990919f
[17] “The 9 Challenges Of Managing An LMS — Wahoo Learning,” Feb. 10,
2020. https://wahoolearning.com/learning-management-system-lms/the-
9-challenges-of-managing-an-lms (accessed Apr. 10, 2022).
